# ES2015

## Objectives
- Explain what ES2015 is and why it's important
- Use ES2015 features to write more concise Javascript

## What is ECMAScript?

JavaScript was originally designed by Brendan Eich for Netscape in 1995. It was submitted a year later to be standardized by Ecma International in the fall of 1996 so that it could be adopted by other browser vendors. This standardization led to the language specification of ECMAScript. The ECMAScript name is often used when talking about the language specifications and the name Javascript is used to talk about the language itself.

ECMAScript releases where initially regular with version 2 and 3 coming out a year later than the previous version. After that, further work on a new specification was continually stalled and obstructed by disagreements between the large tech companies contributing and using the specification. There wasn't another release of ECMAScript until December 2009 with ECMAScript 5. Then it was another six years until ECMAScript 6 was released last year. Because a large, disparate release cycle makes it hard to release new language features that can be regularly adopted, the specifications are changing from a list of what should be included in a specific version (and so everything has to be fully specified for the spec to be released) to a new specification coming out every year that simply contains whatever was finished and is ready to be included in the specification from that year. ES6, or ES2015, is a _large_ set of additions to Javascript just like ES5 was before it. However, ES2016 is tiny and only has two new features. Doing releases like this takes the import off of supporting a specific release version and simply puts more impetus on maintaning up-to-date code and support (because the higher amount of releases makes it much harder to track differences between them).

## ES2015 Features

ECMAScript 2015 includes quite a list of features, but we aren't going to tackle covering everything in class. Instead, we'll take a look at 8(ish) features that you are the most likely to see or that are the most immediately useful. Many of these features had ways of implementing similar functionality in older versions but now it is clear what is being done and any odd-side effects from the implementation hacks are removed.

The eight features we'll look at are

- template strings
- fat arrow functions
- let & const
- classes & super
- for - of loops
- sets & maps
- default & rest parameters
- destructuring

**EXERCISE** In groups, you'll be assigned a specific ES2015 feature. You'll have to figure out what each feature is, why it's useful, create a couple of examples highlighting its use and any odd cases, and create a quick presentation to teach the class.

## Resources

- [Understanding ECMAScript 6](https://leanpub.com/understandinges6/read)
- [Exploring ES6](http://exploringjs.com/es6/)
- [Learn ES2015](https://babeljs.io/docs/learn-es2015/)
- [Node.js ES2015 Support](Node.js ES2015 Support)
- [Javascript Elonge](https://leanpub.com/javascriptallongesix/read)
- [Babel](https://babeljs.io/) Javascript transpiler
