# Basic OOP State / Behavior

## Standards

- Uses `this` to manipulate the current context
- Uses Properties to store State on an Instance
- Creates “Classes” and Instances with JS
- Define and invoke functions as methods on objects

(Related)

- Define and explain the significance of the major principles of Object Oriented Programming
  - in this case namely "state" and "behavior", "classes" and "instances"

## Objectives

There are two parts to learning OOP: the mechanics, and the design.  These exercises focus on the mechanics.

By the end of these exercises you should be able to write basic OOP code (that uses state and behavior, classes and instances) in JavaScript.

## Rationale

Java, Ruby, modern PHP, Objective C and parts of Scala and Swift and Python make heavy use of Classes.  JavaScript can be written in a very Object-Oriented fashion, which makes it a great introduction to the concepts of state/behavior and classes/instances.

Consider these exercises as a gateway to a massive world of object-oriented programs.

## Exercises

Do all of the exercises marked with a ★.

If you can't meet the time requirements, consider doing the exercises in the sections marked "Further Practice".

If you have met the Standard, and want an extra challenge, consider doing the exercise marked "Stretch".

### Basic Objects

Complete the following two exercises:

- ★ https://github.com/gSchool/programming-fundamentals-assessments/tree/master/js/html-builder
- ★ https://github.com/gSchool/programming-fundamentals-assessments/tree/master/js/playlist

🕗You should be able to solve each of these problems in under 20 minutes.

<div class="alert alert-warning">
  <p><strong>Further Practice</strong></p>

  <ul>
    <li>https://github.com/gSchool/programming-fundamentals-assessments/tree/master/js/robots</li>
    <li>https://github.com/gSchool/programming-fundamentals-assessments/tree/master/js/cars</li>
  </ul>
</div>

<div class="alert alert-success">
  <p><strong>Stretch</strong></p>

  <p>See if you can implement all of these with a Linked List in place of arrays</p>
</div>
