## Objectives

* Explain what Angular services are.
* Explain the difference between Angular services and factories.
* Build a custom Angular service.
* Inject a custom Angular service into an Angular controller.

## A brief introduction

As we start building larger applications with multiple controllers, not only is our code per controller becoming larger, but we are starting to face with a new problem. How do we share data, properties and methods between controllers? Our first thought might be to use `$rootScope` and pass it to each of our controllers, but this gets messy quickly. It would be really nice to have to tool to do this - and for that we use services!

## So many choices:

When you start learning about services you will see many different things around creating a `service`, `factory`, or `provider`. These are all commonly called services and one of them is called service...it's a bit tricky, but for the most part these three things serve very similar purposes and they are only a bit different. We will compare and contrast these later, but for now, let's learn a little more about how services work in Angular:

Angular services are components that serve the purpose of abstracting data logic away from your controllers, directives, and even other services.
For example, a request to your server for data or hitting a pubic api is something that would be placed in a service.
Some collection of methods or logic that is used in multiple controllers would be more DRY living in a service that is then referenced by all the controllers that need that logic.
Any data stored in a controller is lost when you change to another controller.
Services on the other hand will persist data between controllers. This is done though something called the singleton pattern.
Don't worry too much about singletons for now. That will be a pattern that will pop up again when you start diving into more Object Oriented Programing.

Services act as internal APIs that are added to your code via dependency injection. From the[ angular docs](https://docs.angularjs.org/guide/services):

> Angular services are:
>
> * Lazily instantiated – Angular only instantiates a service when an application component depends on it.
> * Singletons – Each component dependent on a service gets a reference to the single instance generated by the service factory.


## The "service" service and the "factory" service

The end result of a factory and service is the same: a *singleton instance* that can be used throughout our application. The main difference between a factory and a service comes down to how they are defined.

### *Factory* Service
Using the factory API, you pass in the name of your service and a callback function that returns an object.

Behind the scenes, Angular calls the function and sets the returned object as the *singleton instance* that will be injected into our controllers.

```js
angular
  .module("learnServices", [])
  .factory('personFactory', function(){
    return {
      name: "Matt",
      job: "Instructor",
      sayHi: function(){
        return "Hello!"
      }
    }
  }).controller('personController', function(personFactory){
    // I now have access to all the methods/properties returned from the personFactory!
  })
```

### *Service* Service
Using the service API, you create a constructor function using the `this` syntax to attach properties/methods to the constructor.

Behind the sgenes, Angular calls `new` on your function to create an instance. This instance is set as the *singleton instance* that will be injected into our controllers.

Here is the same service defined using the service API:

```js
angular
  .module("learnServices", [])
  .service('personService', function(){
    this.name = "Matt";
    this.job = "Instructor";
    this.sayHi = function(){
      return "Hello!"
    }
  }).controller('personController', function(personService){
    // I now have access to the personService!
  });
```

A provider is the most complex method and is used less frequently. It is a factory that can be configured before the application starts, which allows for more flexibility, but for the applications we are going to build, you will not need this level of complexity.

## So which one??

For right now we are going to focus on factories. They are a bit easier to reason about having not gotten into OOP and instantiation yet. Many articles will lean towards factories, but with the new ES2015 syntax, services are becoming more preferable. Be aware of both of these and the differences between them.

## Creating our first Service

#### **Note: a factory is a type of service. You will commonly see factories refered to as services**

We are going to start off by creating a `service.js` file to put our service into. Remember from above that one of the reasons we use services is to DRY up our code, so creating a new file for it makes sense. The syntax to create a factory looks like this:

```js
angular
  .module("learningServices")
  .factory("firstService", function() {
    // outside of the return block, we can declare private variables and functions

    // we must return an object, everything we return can be accessed externally
    return {
      sayHi: function() {
        return "Hello!"
      },
      sayGoodbye: function() {
        return "Goodbye!"
      },
      getAllUsers: function() {
        // some AJAX call to our database to get all the users
      },
      addUser: function(user) {
        // another AJAX call to our database to add a user
      }
    }
  });
```

Now in our controller, we can inject this service:

```js
angular
  .module("learningServices")
  .controller("FirstController", function($scope, firstService) {
    $scope.view = {};
    $scope.view.greeting = firstService.sayHi();
    $scope.view.users = firstService.getAllUsers();
  });
```

### Answer the following questions:

- What is a service? What problem do they solve for us?
- What is the difference between a factory and a service?
- Name at least 3 angular built in services that we have used so far.

**EXERCISE todoService**

For this exercise you will be refactoring your todo app. This will involve removing logic related to storing your todos in your app, and also moving logic related to initializing your todos and adding todos into a factory.

All of your logic to create, show, updated and delete todos and people  should be inside of a **service**.

/*
- a user should be able to edit each individual todo.
*/

Currently your controllers should looks something like this:

```js
// controllers.js

(function() {
  'use strict';

  angular
    .module('todoApp')

    .controller('TodoListCtrl', function() {
      this.todoToAdd = '';
      this.todos = [];

      this.addTodo = (todoText) => {
        this.todos.push({
          completed: false,
          text: todoText
        });
        this.todoToAdd = '';
      };
    })

    .controller('PeopleCtrl', function() {
      this.nameToAdd = '';
      this.people = [];

      this.addPerson = (personName) => {
        this.people.push({ name: personName });
        this.nameToAdd = '';
      };
    });

})();
```

We know that we are going to be abstracting some things out of the controllers here into services, and we know that our servies are going to be defined in the `services.js` file we already created. Let's go over to that file and build out the basic skelton for those services.

```js
// services.js

(function() {
  'use strict';

  const app = angular.module('todoApp');

  app.factory('Todos', function() {
    return {
      addTodo: function(todo) {
        // POST todo data
      },
    }
  });
})();
```
In the above `TodoListCtrl` we have a method which pushes data for a todo into the `todos` array that is also defined on this controller.

### Resources

[Singleton Design Pattern](http://robdodson.me/javascript-design-patterns-singleton/)
[Singleton Wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Singleton_pattern)
[Putting Angular Code in the Right Place](http://datamelon.io/blog/2016/putting-angular-code-in-the-right-place.html)

More about the differences between factories and services:

[ng-newsletter: The short guide to service definitions](http://www.ng-newsletter.com/25-days-of-angular/day-1)
[Service VS Factory - ONCE AND FOR ALL](http://blog.thoughtram.io/angular/2015/07/07/service-vs-factory-once-and-for-all.html)
[AngularJS: Factory vs Service vs Provider](http://tylermcginnis.com/angularjs-factory-vs-service-vs-provider/)
[AngularJS Providers Explained](https://gist.github.com/demisx/9605099)
